and this is where we are more likely
to have the fog, that is where
we have the yellow fog
warning from the Met Office
into the morning.
The fog dense in places,
lifting into low cloud,
may be thinning in the afternoon
and brightening up, but on the whole
it looks cloudy and dry
during the afternoon.
To the north of London,
towards the Home Counties,
temperatures may be no
better than 3—4C.
Looking further ahead,
the weekend and beyond,
it will be milder but it looks
like there will be a lot of cloud.
The national picture is with Ben.
Good evening. It
Good evening. It is getting pretty
murky out there stop we have fog
developing at the moment,
particularly across parts of England
particularty across parts of England
and
particularly across parts of England
and Wales. This was the scene in
Norfolk a
Norfolk 3 short time ago. We have
Norfolk a short time ago. We have
two
Norfolk 3 short time ago. We have
two weather fronts,
two weatherfronts, one
Norfolk 3 short time ago. We have
two weather fronts, one to the
north-west,
north—west, one to the south—east,
north-west, one to the south-east,
both producing a
north—west, one to the south—east,
both producing a little bit of
patchy rain, but in between in this
9’P-
gap, with very like winds and clear
skies, that’s where the fog is
developing. It’s where we’ve got
some pretty low temperatures,
dropping below freezing and quite a
few places through tonight. The fog
most likely across parts of East
Walas,
Wales, the West Country, into the
Walas, the West Country, into the
Midlands,
Wales, the West Country, into the
Midlands, eastern England, some
parts of northern England as well,
and where you have the fog tomorrow
morning it will take a while to
morning it will take a whila to
clear.
morning it will take a while to
clear. Some spots will stay grey and
dear. Some spots will stay grey and
murky
clear. Some spots will stay grey and
murky all day long. The weather
fronts I showed you are bringing
some patchy rain across Scotland and
Northern Ireland and a little bit
pushing into southern counties of
England later in the day. If you
keep fog all day long you might get
to three or
to three orfour
keep fog all day long you might get
to three or four micro degrees, even
in brightness 8-9
in brightness 8—9 is the best we can
in brightness 8-9 is the best we ran
expect. During
in brightness 8—9 is the best we can
expect. During Friday night the fog
will redevelop across parts of
England and Wales. Some rain across
England and Walas. Some rain across
Scotland
England and Wales. Some rain across
Scotland but pushing northwards
allows some sunshine to develop on
Saturday. For Northern Ireland for a
time as well. England and Wales,
time as well. England and Walas,
after
time as well. England and Wales,
after what could be a foggy start,
is likely to stay grey and cloudy, a
little bit milder towards the south
and a similar day
SEDATE ELECTRONIC MUSIC
Lord, may you protect
your servant Leroy.
Please keep him safe
for his police training
and grant us the wisdom
to accept his decision.
Out there, it is us and them.
That’s how it works.
Sometimes I think
the earth needs to be scorched...
..so something good will come of it.
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel, Nadhim Zahawi,
an MP for ten years,
currently the government’s business
and industry minister and before
that, children’s minister.
Joining us down the line
from Cardiff, Labour secretary
for health and social services
in the Welsh Government,
Vaughan Gething.
An MP who left Westminster to become
a member of the Senedd
and was elected two years ago
as leader of Plaid
Cymru, Adam Price.
Claire Fox, a former Communist
turned Brexit Party MEP.
She was made a Baroness
by Boris Johnson last year
and is director of the free—speech
organisation, Institute of ideas.
And joining us from Teesside,
Paralympian, multiple gold medal
winner and two—time world champion
wheelchair racer, now a campaigner
and crossbench peer,
Tanni Grey—Thompson.
APPLAUSE.
Good evening, welcome to my guests
here in the studio and to Vaughan
and Tanni who arejoining us down
the line and of course
to our Virtual audience,
tonight you are from Swansea,
thank you very much forjoining us
for the programme this evening
and of course thanks
to you forjoining us
at home and for watching
and if you want to join
in the conversation,
you can do it in the usual way,
@bbcquestiontime, and on social
media and let’s hear
what you have got to say.
Right, we will start
with ourfirst question,
which is from Mikejones.
Thanks, Fiona.
As BorisJohnson has announced
severe tier levels in England,
should we alljust be as strict
as possible and buckle down to avoid
another spike early in the New Year?
Tanni.
Do you want to start us off?
Yeah, I think this is incredible.
I think the good thing
about Christmas is that everyone
is agreed on what we should be doing
in terms of lockdown.
I think the guidance
is really important,
but the tier system is a reaction
to the R rate going up
and I think it is important.
My worry over Christmas
is that it willjust get very
complicated in January,
February, March and there could be
a huge lockdown for everybody
and I think people are tired,
they are exhausted with,
you know working at home,
we are living at work,
and the mental health pressures
on people are going to be huge.
So, it is incredibly important that
I think people are really
sensible over Christmas,
you know, they are not going to be
stupid, they have to take some
personal responsibility with this,
but we are a long way from getting
a vaccine and being out of this
and on the other side.
I think it is quite hard,
actually, when every
part of the country,
potentially, has different levels,
to actually understand
what you can and cannot do,
because the guidance gets quite
complicated in terms of crossing
borders and regions and areas
and I know where I live we were told
in the previous lockdown
that it was County Durham and then
it turned out it was
the Durham County.
I think everyone has got to be
really, really clear on what those
levels mean to individuals.
And you are in Tier 3
as of next week, Tanni.
Nadhim, the question is should
we all be as strict as possible,
I mean 99% of England is under Tier
2 and Tier 3 now, is this another
lockdown by another name?
Well, if you look at Tier 2 and Tier
3, you are absolutely right,
they have been tightened up,
but retail will reopen.
People can go to the gym,
clearly there are differences
and people should obviously look
at gov.uk to see
where their area is.
They are tougher, the R number has
been coming down and it is now
between one and 1.1,
it was 1.3 before the
national interventions
in England were introduced.
between one and 1.1,
it was 1.3 before the
national interventions
in England were introduced.
That will end on the 2nd
of December and this
new tiering system will apply.
Look, I think the combination
of community testing which we saw
worked really well in Liverpool
and Liverpool is a great example
of the local leadership
working with the government
to get this right.
They are in Tier 2
I think a positive.
In other areas, like my area, sadly,
in the West Midlands, we are in Tier
3 and although Stratford—upon—Avon
has a low infection rate
per 100,000, the surrounding area
of Solihull and North Warwickshire
is much higher, so we have
had to go into Tier 3.
And can I ask you about the mass
testing, because the Prime Minister
gave a press conference today
at five o’clock and he said,
the previous tier systems slow
down infection rates.
Mass testing could allow
individuals to be released
from certain restrictions,
even if they are living in Tier 3.
What did he mean by that?
Did he mean...
We are talking about individuals,
everyone in Tier 3 coming out
in a particular region,
but individuals within Tier 3
could get a test and then, what?
Have people round?
What did he mean?
So, the pilot that was run
in Liverpool, which I think
is really important,
is, if you are then tested
every day for five days,
if you were someone who has been
notified through test and trace
of someone who has the infection
that you have been close to,
then you do not have to quarantine.
That is a big change.
So, the people who are in Tier 3
as of next week, let us be clear,
because this was new information
this afternoon, that is 23 million
people, if they are in Tier 3 next
week, they have to be,
what, tested for five days in a row
and then they are free to do
what they want or what did
he mean exactly?
The pilot that was run
in Liverpool was around,
if you are notified that you have
been in contact with someone who has
tested positive for coronavirus,
at the moment you would
have to quarantine.
As the Prime Minister is doing.
If you, as we did in Liverpool...
Isn’t that a different
thing, though?
I just want to be really clear,
because it really struck me,
if the Prime Minister is saying that
mass testing could allow
individuals to be released
from certain restrictions,
even when they are in Tier 3,
he is saying that people that
have a negative test can live
in a different way to those who have
not had a negative test or haven’t
even been tested at all in Tier 3,
is that what he means?
No, I think the restriction
is the quarantine issue.
So, if you are, as we have
just done in Liverpool,
if you get notified,
you have to quarantine,
therefore further restrictions
on your ability to move around.
If you get a test every day
and you test negative,
then you don’t have to quarantine
and that is being delivered through
this pilot community testing.
But that is true everywhere,
notjust here three.
He was just referring to Tier 3.
The reason he was referring to Tier
3 is because we are focusing
community testing on Tier 3 areas.
Claire.
Should we all be as strict
as possible and buckle down?
When we were told that we had
to accept the lockdown,
which a lot of people felt very
unhappy about, felt that there
was not enough evidence
for national lockdown,
it was very much on the assumption
that we would leave the lockdown
and things might have improved.
The reality is that over 23 million
people who had previously been
living under Tier1 had gone
into lockdown and have now come
out in higher tiers.
It feels like perpetual
punishment and even the way
we are talking about it,
you know, a kind of release
from certain restrictions, you know,
whether the Prime Minister
will allow us, if we buckle down,
and then we can have Christmas,
then the whole discussion around
Christmas has been very
much, you know, well,
we are going to indulge you people
who want Christmas with their
families for five days,
but you are going to pay for it.
And I am afraid that the problem
for me with this whole discussion
is that we are free,
we are supposed to live in a free
society, a democracy,
but we are behaving as though
we are in a pre—democratic time
with some kind of fiefdom announcing
and micromanaging exactly
what we should do.
I think it is the opposite
of getting consent,
of bringing about trust,
of encouraging people to take
themselves seriously,
because we are literally having
discussions like this,
technocratic, would it meanness?
Does it mean that?
Should I dot the i and cross the t?
Given that we are in a pandemic,
what is the alternative?
Yes, but there are ways
of dealing with pandemics,
lots of different possibilities.
Claire, you saw the response
from Liverpool and the community
in Liverpool and people actually
coming out and working together
and they have done really well.
Yes, but social solidarity requires
that people do not believe that
arbitrarily their freedoms are taken
away from them and there
is no balance of risks.
The only thing that we face
at the moment is, you know,
you say we are in a pandemic,
we are in a pandemic,
we also undoubtedly will
talk about the economy.
That pandemic is one
of the things facing the society,
as are very many others and the way
we have responded to that pandemic
has created a tsunami,
a pandemic, of unemployment,
of immiseration, of isolation,
of the robbing of autonomy
and of our freedoms and of our civil
liberties and at the very least
I should be able to say that
without the inference being that
I have not noticed we are
living in a pandemic.
I think it is important
and I think also, by the way,
many of the local authorities that
are now going to have higher
tiers is actually falling
rates of coronavirus.
Death rates are going down
in relation to what they were.
So, what I am saying is,
we are told if only we accept this
particular hard measure,
all will be well.
Well, we have just had a lockdown,
we are not even out of it
and now we are being told,
we are going to have hard tiering
and we have got to behave,
otherwise we will not have Christmas
and then at Christmas you have got
to be sensible otherwise
you are going to pay for it.
It is like some sort of religious
cult we have entered
into and the one thing that nobody
discusses is what this does
for freedom and democracy in society
and I really think that is a very
serious price to pay and should
at least be debated fully.
Well, let us see what our audience
are thinking in Swansea.
Gemma.
Yes, thank you, Ijust wanted to say
I don’t really see how
these tiers work at all.
I think we were in 3 tier system
and that resulted in us
going into another lockdown
and a in Wales.
I think the lockdown in March
was far more effective
because there was one rule
for everybody and we knew
what we had to do, but with all
these different tiers I just think
it adds confusion.
I am from a small valley
where there has been a spike
in cases and I think we need
to protect people in areas
with the cases are low to make sure
that we do not get any cases
escalating in those areas.
Claire.
Thank you, Fiona.
I think it is all very confusing.
I think it is all open
to interpretation and it
all boils down to trust.
I think trust is really important.
Here in Wales, the firebreak
lockdown clearly worked,
numbers were falling,
ten consecutive days,
numbers were falling and then
recently numbers have started
to increase and that is mainly
in the under 255 group and I think
that the message has to go out loud
and clear that everybody has a part
to play and trust is key,
trust is essential.
So, everybody has to be prepared
to take part and do their bit.
Of course, you are living under
different rules in Wales,
Claire, are you saying
that they are confusing?
I think our rules in Wales are quite
straightforward, actually,
but listening to all the different
tier system is and where you can go
and where you can eat
and where you can go to socialise
and who could socialise,
listening to some of my friends
and colleagues in the different tier
systems in England, it is quite
baffling at times and I think
even they are confused.
So, I think we need clarity.
And Michael.
Michael B.
Hello.
Thank you.
I just wanted to say,
is it really worth the potential
oppression and depression that
spending time at the family over
Christmas that we could lead
into a potential third
wave of coronavirus?
Is it really worth
that potential risk?
So, as far as you are concerned,
it would be betterfor us
to stay apart at Christmas?
I think so, yes.
I think we are coming into January,
it is probably one of the most
depressing months in the year
and then we are probably
going into another lockdown.
Is that really worth it for spending
a few days with family?
Vaughan?
Vaughan Gething?
Well, these are incredibly difficult
choices for all of us,
whether we are members
of the public, going
about living our lives,
front line health and care staff,
who are looking after us
all and indeed politicians like me,
a Health Minister with some
responsibility for more
than 3 million souls here in Wales.
There is nothing glib,
we are not looking to take
away people’s liberties.
We are looking to do the right
thing, to keep while safe
and to protect as many
lives as possible.
The rules are only part of that.
What we are really trying to do
is to help people to think
about what we should do.
The firebreak did work,
it did significantly reduce
the numbers of infections.
It saw a flat line,
but they are starting to rise again
and as we see that extra mix
in those extra cases,
that means more people coming
into our hospitals and it means more
people who will not come out
of hospitals and the infection rates
that are rising in under 255
will eventually translate
into people over the age of 60
and they are much more likely
to come to harm.
So, our real challenge
is understanding how people behave,
how we help people to make different
choices and to accept that we cannot
micromanage every situation,
but our responsibility,
we clear up what we want people
to do and there are times we set
harder rules about what can happen.
We have got a much bigger testing
programme now than what we had
at the start and here in Wales
we have got a very effective test,
trace and protect system that
in the last week up to 92% of index
cases and 82% of their contacts.
And, Vaughan, you talk
about the fact that cases
are beginning to rise again.
I mean, looking at Blaenau Gwent,
for example, you’ve got
A10 cases per 100,000.
But two households can meet,
pubs and restaurants are open.
Whereas in Manchester, for example,
there are 250 cases per 100,000
and pubs and restaurants are shut,
except for takeaway.
I know that you’ve been meeting
today to talk about next step
for the Welsh Government,
are you envisaging tighter
restrictions, going forward?
It’s entirely possible.
And that isn’t because it’s
something that I celebrate.
I never came into politics
to intervene in the way people
live their lives in this
sort of way.
But if we don’t do something then,
as I say, we’ll witness and we’ll
stand by while people are coming
to harm, and we can’t do that.
The responsibility of the government
is to care for the people we’re
responsible for, the people
that we serve, and I’ve already
indicated at the start of this week
that we’re looking at the potential
for different national measures.
And I always said —
as the First Minister did —
going into the firebreak,
we hope to get to the end
of the year, but if case numbers
move in the wrong direction,
we may have to do
something different.
And it’s entirely possible
we’ll have to do that.
The cabinet will meet again
during the day tomorrow and we’ll
have some decisions to make.
All of those decisions
are how we take care
of ourselves and each other,
and how we continue to keep safe.
And in that, the reason we’ve been
able to have some success
in with what we’ve done
with the firebreak is
because people have responded
to the measures we’ve taken
and the leadership we’ve given.
But we still need to do more to get
there, in this great national effort
against a pandemic.
In public health terms,
but also the economic...
OK, I need to bring the rest
of the panel in, Vaughan.
Thank you.
Adam.
Yes.
And clearly, the Welsh Government
does have some difficult decisions
to make in the next few days.
And how do you think those
decisions should go?
Well, look, I mean, the first thing,
I think none of this is easy.
I think Claire is right
that there is a balance of harms
always and risks here that has
to be considered.
But clearly, the position that
you don’t want to be in is to see
that exponential rise
in cases again.
And particularly...
The current restrictions,
it would seem,
are not going to be enough to keep
that level, the prevalence
of the disease down.
And then you’re in a very dangerous
position, where you could see a rise
in cases leading to a rise
in hospitalisation throughout
December, as we get to Christmas,
when you have the easing in order
to allow people to get together.
So, what’s your response
to Michael’s question?
Should we alljust be as script
as possible and buckle down?
Absolutely.
I think the point that the audience
has made actually, in terms
of the importance of trust,
the importance of clear
communication, and underlining
the fact that governments
have an important role.
There are certain things that
only governments can do
and the rules and the regulations,
the restrictions are part of that.
But actually, we will only defeat
this virus if we all play our part.
You know, that’s the real
truth of the situation.
Lockdowns should only ever be
a last—resort option,
when you have to do that
because of this exponential rise.
The way we suppress the virus
is if we keep to those
simple rules of avoiding,
wherever possible, you know,
close contact in crowded situations.
So, we all have a
contribution to make.
Clearly, the Government
is going to have to make some
difficult decisions.
The one plea is, if they are looking
at introducing similar Tier 3—like
restrictions in hospitality, we have
to provide the economic support.
So we’ve got to align health policy
with the economic policy,
so if we’re closing businesses,
I would like to see
the Welsh Government providing
a higher level of support to those
businesses to help them
effectively to hibernate.
To survive through this
difficult period.
You know, there is some light
at the end of the tunnel,
we are going to get through this,
but let’s save lives
and save livelihoods.
So let’s make sure that we have
the health and the economic
policy working in tandem,
and that goes for the
self—employed as well.
The self—employed have been badly
let down by the UK Government.
So I’d like to see the Welsh
Government going one better
and helping those people that have
fallen between the cracks.
I need to bring the audience
in as well, who are sitting
here very patiently.
Hannah.
Ijust wanted to say that I agree
with the point I think
it was Michael made about,
is it worth itjust
for a few days at Christmas?
You know, we’re talking about cases
rising, it looks like cases
are going to rise through December
and, yet, the green light’s
been
given to people to meet at Christmas
time,
regardless of where
we are at at this point.
Is it really worth it?
A lot of us don’t want to,
yet we’re all going to pay
for it in either way.
0K, Rachel.
Hi.
I just feel that the devolved
governments have done so much better
a job of passing the messages
on than the Westminster
Government has done.
I think it’s been quite a learning
opportunity for Westminster,
if only they would actually pay
attention to what the devolved
governments are doing.
Peter.
I think it’s important
that we as a country all work
together to reduce the risk
to the most vulnerable.
And if that means that we have
to forego time at Christmas
with the ones that we love,
then I think that is something
that we should all do
for the greater good.
0K.
Briefly, Claire, yes.
Yeah, I think we all want to protect
the vulnerable, but one
of the problems with a lot
of the lockdown measures —
and that includes tiering systems —
is the very people who are being
neglected are the vulnerable.
I mean, you can’t visit
people in care homes.
They are lonely.
Mrs Smith, in number 16,
can’t get any visitors.
People with dementia in care homes
are dying because they’re
not being stimulated,
they’ve got no attention.
The vulnerable are actually
being neglected by our attempts
at protecting the vulnerable.
You can visit care homes in Wales,
it’s worth pointing out,
given there are already
exceptions in Swansea.
Yes, yes, but it’s also the case
that there’s been massive
restrictions on visits in care
homes in Wales.
I’m from Wales and know
people in care homes.
The misery, the terror,
the horror, the loneliness.
We’re making it sound as though...
And then people have said, well,
don’t let’s have Christmas, then.
I think people don’t
have to have Christmas
if you don’t want to, feel free.
I think that we have to consider
what it is we consider to be
important about what it means to be
alive, how we relate to people,
what our relationships
are like with people.
And I think thatjust seeing it
through Covid eyes only means
that we neglect the hugely important
social aspects of protecting people,
of sociability, civility.
Young people are having their lives
thwarted and, you know,
people kind of talk about them
going out and wanting to go
and have a drink as if it’s the most
irresponsible thing in the world,
and then we infantilise
people in the process,
because we don’t trust them.
So when people say about trust,
you can’t have trust if you then
say, "But if you break the rules,
you’ll be fined and you’ll be
accused of killing Granny."
You’ve got to actually trust
people, and that requires
a different approach to this.
And I think it would
actually be beneficial
to the vulnerable to adopt that.
Very quickly because,
otherwise, I can’t move
on to the next question.
We’re piloting schemes in 20 care
homes of how we can get two
visits in through testing.
And of course, the weekly testing
of care staff and the monthly
testing of residents.
And I have to give a shout—out —
I’m a patron of a charity
called Kissing it Better,
which gets young people
to go to care homes
through the Covid crisis,
and before, to perform,
to sing outside, and has
made a huge difference.
Something makes me think we’ll be
talking about Christmas restrictions
for however many days there are left
of Christmas, I don’t
know, but I know it’s
coming up very quickly.
But before I do, Ijust want to say
that we’re looking for people
to join our virtual audience
for next week’s programme.
That is in Bath.
And the week after that, Chelmsford.
Obviously, we can’t come
to you, but you can come
to us from the comfort
of your living room.
So, if you live in or around Bath
or Chelmsford, do get in touch
on the Question Time website.
Come and be part of the programme.
You are what makes Question Time
what it is, so dojoin in.
Right, let’s take our next question
now, which is from Janette Williams.
Thanks, Fiona.
The economic effect caused
by Covid—19 will be felt for years.
Should public—sector workers expect
pay rises whilst thousands
from the private sector
are faced with unemployment?
Vaughan.
I think public—sector workers do
deserve a fair pay rise.
People have been on streets
applauding for them
in the first wave.
We’re now told that the Government,
the UK Government, will fund
a health—service pay rise, but not
other public—service workers.
And yet, we have environmental
health officers from the local
government who have been a key part
of our response.
We have all the staff who have
worked to keep our schools open.
All those other local workers,
police officers and the Army.
The Army are a key part
of the response to the mass
testing in Merthyr Tydfil.
And yet, they’re being told
that they don’t deserve a pay rise.
And actually, suppressing pay
in our public sector will actually
mean there are less people
who will be able to go and spend
in the local economy as well,
so I don’t think it’s
the right choice.
I think it’s a real kick
in the teeth for so many people
who kept the country going,
and we’re still going to rely
on those people through a very,
very difficult winter.
I think the Chancellor should take
the opportunity to think again
because it sends out a message
about how much we value people
who have given up so much —
and, in some cases, everything —
to keep all of us safe.
Janette, you asked the question,
what’s your view?
I’ve worked in the public sector
most of my employment.
I think the nurses, the police,
I’d want to give, there’s so many
people have contributed to,
you know, immensely
to the cause with Covid.
But we haven’t got the money,
you know, the money’s
not going to be there.
How do you solve it,
do we need to just take stock?
Fantastic that the NHS
has got the money.
However, I don’t know.
I really don’t know,
it’s a huge one.
Claire.
I think it’s really wrong, Vaughan,
to talk about this decision
as being about anyone
saying that no—one...
You said, no—one is being told...
You said, people are being told
that they don’t deserve a pay rise.
I don’t think anyone is saying that.
I think actually, it is incredibly
divisive at the moment to try
and imply that public—sector workers
not getting a pay rise at this time
is because, you know,
there’s always the danger of evil
Tories hate the public sector.
But let’s consider what,
for example, your firebreak lockdown
did in Wales to the people who run
nail bars, to the hairdressers,
to the people whose life savings
have been absolutely destroyed,
who face bankruptcy, who potentially
are going to lose their homes.
These people...
I mean, nobody deserved to be told
that they couldn’t make a living
but, as people keep reminding me,
there’s a pandemic,
and the Government brought
in certain things and
furlough isn’t sufficient.
You know, and many public—sector
workers are actually in a stronger
decision at the moment,
in terms ofjob security,
than people in the private sector.
You know, the private sector is full
of people who actually also
were the invisible front
line that kept us going,
the people who dropped off to those
people who enjoy working from home,
who dropped off the Amazon,
the Deliveroo drivers.
All of these people
deserve pay rises.
We all deserve pay rises.
But what I’d say is,
that misses the point.
And you cannot be in a situation,
and I can’t understand why
the Labour Party haven’t worked
this bit out.
The Labour Party have been calling
forstronger, harder, longer,
deeper lockdowns since the beginning
of this thing.
They want to close the economy down
and then seem to be shocked
that there is an economic crisis
that’s going to be the greatest
facing for notjust decades,
but for centuries.
So, we’ve got a major problem.
At some point, somebody’s
got to create...
We’ve got to have development,
economic prosperity,
industrialisation, to create
the facilities that allow public
sector, not the facilities,
that allow the public sector
to exist in the first place.
To highlight public sector
as though they’re the only
heroes of this pandemic,
I completely salute care workers
and all the rest of it.
I salute the public sector
workers who worked.
But my goodness,
the people who didn’t work weren’t
just lazing around doing nothing,
working for the private
sector, getting well paid.
They’re being absolutely
treated with contempt
and have been forgotten and,
therefore, don’t be
divisive about it.
Jared.
0h, Vaughan.
0K, quickly, sorry.
We’ve got the best support of any UK
nation to support the private
sector through the pandemic.
We have put our money
where our mouth is in supporting
public sector workers.
We’ve also put significant financial
support over and above what the UK
Government has provided
to our private sector.
The idea that we despise the private
sector is just simply not true.
It’s a strawman, not a serious
answer to the really serious
questions we face as a country.
This really is a fight for lives
and livelihoods, and that has always
driven our approach here in Wales.
Tanni.
Most of my close family work
in the front line of the public
sector so my heart says,
yes, absolutely, people
need to feel valued.
And one of my best friends
is a nurse and I said to her,
actually, can you explain the last
three or four pay rises to me?
And actually, you almost need
a degree in economics
to work it out because,
half the time, it’s a pay
freeze and over ten years,
rather than actually something that
is a pay rise.
So my heart says, yes.
However, if you look at the figures
of where we are now,
this is twice as bad
as the crisis in 2008.
This is the most amount of money
the British Government has had
to borrow since the Second World
War.
And we have to think
about how we pay that back,
because we have to pay it back
at some time.
So, for me, it’s thinking
about how we can be more
creative with the economy.
You know, we know four
out of five pubs —
if they’re in Tier 2 and Tier 3 —
won’t open, going forward,
will choose not to open.
And thatjust keeps having a big
effect on all the different economy.
But for me, you know,
I do a lot of work in physical
activity and that sector,
and it’s thinking about how
we can change the value,
how we can bring different sectors
together to boost the economy.
And we have to be really creative,
in a way that we’ve
never had to do before.
You know, we talk aboutjoining up
government, you know,
that never quite works
because the legislation work
is always in specific subject areas.
But I think we have
to be more creative.
have got so much sympathy for
businesses that are yo—yoing in and
out and don’t know what to do.
I worked on the Welfare
Reform Bill in
2012 and legal aid punishment fans
and we thought that was brutal and
it is much worse now and we have
also got to think about the people
on Universal Credit,
that is pushing them
into even greater poverty.
We have got to think
about how we can
protect the most vulnerable
that we have in society.
There are no easy answers to this.
I mean, it is really
easy for me as a
parliamentarian to sit
and tell the government
what I think they should do.
We have all got
opinions on everything.
I don’t think I would want to be
the Chancellor right now.
He is in an unenviable position in
terms of what they are trying to do.
We have to find a way out of this.
Let’s hear what our
audience have got to say.
Kane.
Yeah, Ijust wanted
to bring in the voluntary
on the third sector.
I work in a third
sector organisation
and I think across the board
in Wales, the sector have done an
incredible job in terms of working
with the most vulnerable in society
over the pandemic period.
When we are discussing
public services and
pay rises, and private
versus public sector,
I think the voluntary sector often
goes missing in that debate.
I also work with
people who are living
directly, struggling
directly with poverty.
A lot of parent carers who actually
are completely unpaid for
the work that they do,
so I think we need to be having this
debate within a wider context,
bearing in mind
that services, personal
assistance services,
carers, have been unable
to undertake their normal duties and
we have a lot of parents, women
especially, who have been left to
take that role and they have had no
reward and no financial recompense
for doing that whatsoever.
Jack.
Well, I would just
like to say that I agree
completely with Claire
on
this point.
At this stage of the pandemic,
speaking of pay rises is
completely unwarranted, really.
It only serves to
split us apart when
at this point we should stand
together and in addition to that,
who gets to say who
should be paid what?
How can you put a price on a life?
Jared.
I completely agree with Claire’s
point and it is really
refreshing to see somebody in the
mainstream media making this case
for looking at the bigger picture,
rather than the knee jerk lockdown
reactions that we have seen time
after time and there are much wider
implications as a
result of lockdown.
We talked about the mental health
pandemic that is with us and
is going to be with
us for some time.
We have seen the economic damage
that has been caused as a
result of these lockdown
actions and I think
we really have to look
at
the bigger picture once we make
these decisions and be ready from
the range of impacts
that come from them.
Adam, let mejust remind
you of the question.
Should public sector
workers get pay rises while
thousands from the private sector
are faced with unemployment?
Well, I suppose
politics and economics
really is about
priorities, isn’t it?
I think it does say something
about the government that the first
area they look at when they are
looking to make savings is, you
know, public sector workers pay
and the global poor.
And, by the way, we are talking
about a real terms cut,
so let’s be clear about these
public sector workers.
I think it is precisely
the wrong thing to say and
do at this point, because we have
had 13 years effectively off
austerity, we made this mistake last
time we had an economic crisis and
in an economic crisis...
This is a much larger
economic crisis.
Well, in terms of
the situation that we
are facing in unemployment, yes, but
there was an economist 100 years ago
who wrote a pamphlet,
the consequences of
the peace, John Maynard
Keynes, and he said, when you’re
faced with an economic crisis,
precisely the lies thing you should
do is to cutback on government
spending.
It sounds kind of implicitly
sensible, doesn’t it?
We have got no money
because the economy
is going down, therefore
we
will spend less, but governments
have an absolute central role, which
is unique in this circumstance,
they are the only
ones, when you’re in
a
deflationary spiral,
it is only governments that can keep
actually the economy going and then
that
works, by the way, for private
sector workers and public sector
workers.
It is the mistake we made last time,
after the last economic
crisis, we went into austerity,
which is why wages have stagnated,
in the public sector in particular.
What does that mean as well?
We find it difficult
to recruit nurses,
social care workers, teachers etc,
all the public services that we have
realised in this pandemic that
are absolutely critical in being the
decent society that we want to be
and are we saying, after all that,
the first place we are going to cut
is the pay of public sector workers?
These are not the values that
I would like to see from our
government.
Nadhim.
Thank you.
And, Janette, thank
you for the question
and it is actually...
That is not true what you
have just heard, so as
far as nurses and doctors,
there will be a pay rise,
as well as for 2.1 million public
sector workers
who are on £24,000 or
less a £250 pay rise.
That is likely to be
less than inflation.
So that is a pay cut.
It is still £250 additional,
in a difficult time,
which we have been discussing.
If you take a look at inflation,
it is not a pay rise.
Let me make my point forJanette.
For the private sector,
and to the point
that there are about, you’re
absolutely right, Claire, one should
not be divisive about these things.
The national living
wage will rise to £8
91, to support workers
in the
private sector, in the third sector
as well, but how do you create more
prosperity?
This is what the Chancellor
has tried to do.
If you look at what
he published with the
statement, which is the national
infrastructure strategy for next
year, £100 billion of spending over
five years, 600 billion, what does
that mean?
What does that mean
to you in Swansea?
Well, what it means is that
in Swansea, as part of the
city deal, there will be £150
million invested in Swansea, in part
of that city deal, to create that
prosperity, to create the economic
recovery that Claire talks about.
50 two thirds of a trillion
over five years
of investment in infrastructure
in our schools, hospitals, our rail,
our digital infrastructure.
Hang on, I think we have
got a bit off the
question here, haven’t we?
Should public sector
workers expect pay
rises, when thousands in the private
sector are faced with unemployment?
If the question went round, Fiona,
and it went from talking about pay
rises in a difficult time of Corona,
yes of course, we are making sure
that nurses and doctors
get the pay rises, that
public sector workers
on
£24,000 or less get £250.
It is a little bit awkward...
MPs may be getting
a pay rise of 4.1%.
That’s wrong.
I have been on record and said that
already and if it does
happen, I hope that IPSA changes
that and I hope that the treat MPs
in the same way that we are asking
the public sector to contribute to
the effort to get this
country back on its feet.
It is wrong.
There are are a couple
of hands up, I want to
takejust before I move on.
Phil.
The books need to be balanced
and there are difficult choices for
politicians to make and I think
Tanni alluded to it as I am going to
now, who would be a politician in
the situation with all the books to
be balanced and everything else?
Back to the question, should
the public sector worker have a pay
freeze?
The private sector have been hit
very hard, the public sector
have been hit very hard,
but the public sector workers
have had their wages,
they have been paid, albeit
perhaps not as much as they would
like and in our hearts, as Tanni
said, they deserve more,
but can we afford it?
My children, my grandchildren
and possibly my great
grandchildren will have
to be paying for this
for many, many years
to
come and the policies that have
to be embraced have to balance the
books.
Perhaps the Chancellor should have
apologised before he made the
statement, perhaps he should have
said in a different way, but I do
feel that the public sector workers,
if they have been paid and they
continue to be able
to be paid, I think
they have had a fair deal
as
much as possible in this horrible
situation that we are in.
Let us take another
question from Shireen
Al—Salihi.
Is it right to cut up
the foreign aid budget?
Well, look, Nadhim,
we are going to come to you
on this, obviously.
It is one of the toughest
decisions we have had to
make, Shireen, the Chancellor
explained at the dispatch box, as
did the Foreign Secretary today,
that we will, as soon as we can, go
back to the 0.7% of
GNI on foreign aid.
By the way, even at 0.5%, we are
still only second of the G7 in
terms of our development spending.
I am very proud,
because my department
was responsible for
the vaccines tax force,
that we hosted the summit
in
the UK which raised eight point 8
billion and we are contributing 330
million a year to the Gavi vaccine
initiative to vaccinate the poorest
children in the world.
We continue to play
a leadership position in our
overseas development investment
and spending but also the 2A billion
over the next four years
going into the Ministry of Defence
and making sure that our ability
tojoin up
both our overseas
development and what
we ran do for the rest
of the
world in terms of peacekeeping
and every other part of the Foreign
Office work in terms
of the combination of Foreign Office
leadership and development
leadership is something we should
all be proud of and I hope that
as soon as we can and does fill was
just saying balance the books
and get back to the 0.7%.
Adam.
I think it is a very
very sad move by
the government and I think
particularly at this time when
developing countries are also
struggling with this pandemic and
all of the harms that
flow from that and,
you know, lam stmck
by the
contrast between the incoming Biden
administration and thank God the
political weather is changing there
and they are talking about America
showing global leadership, being
a progressive force in the world
again.
Rejoining the WHO, supporting
the climate change agreement and
doing more...
They don’t spend as much on aid.
They are talking about going
on the other direction,
because they realise
that America as one
of the richest countries
in the
world has a responsibility and I
think I would like us to be doing
"I’M-F
The Scandinavian countries aim
for 1% of GDP which was the original
target from the UN and to
be going on the other
direction I think it
is
a sad indictment of the values
of this government once again.
It is a percentage
figure after all and I
think it is absolutely
important that we say,
even at this difficult time,
because it is globally a
difficult time, we do
have a responsibility,
we are citizens of the world
and we have to demonstrate
that in the kind of
decisions that we make.
Shireen.
Given that the defence budget has
increased, that we can always
pull billions out of the bag
for war, for killing,
for the renewal of Trident,
wouldn’t that money now be
better spent on giving our nurses
3 well earned pay rise?
I think we should put
welfare before warfare
and I think we should put people
before profit and if we stop selling
arms to Saudi, countries
like Yemen wouldn’t
need our foreign aid
and
millions of civilians there,
their suffering would ease.
Shireen, we are giving
nurses 3 pay rise, but...
Very briefly, because I want
to bring the audience in.
The peacekeeping work
around the world
is important.
You have made that point, thank you.
Let us hear what our
audience have to say.
Yeah, the UK’s reputation
as a global player
would be threatened just as it takes
on the chairmanship of the G7 summit
and hosts the UN climate
change conference next
year by investing
in
these developing nations, the UK
would help to develop these emerging
markets and that investment would
allow us to rate financial rewards,
having close trading
links with those nations.
Also on the cusp of having
a vaccine that will only be
effective if we are able
to distribute worldwide and have an
effective programme
worldwide will we be
able to get on top of
this
pandemic.
Stewart.
We are now contributing
about £20 billion a
year as aid and that would be
reduced to about {13.5 billion.
We would still be
in the top three or
four contributors
throughout the world.
I think, Stewart, just to correct
you, we would actually be
giving less than that, but we would
be the second largest giver of
foreign aid in the G7.
But do go on, make your point.
Sorry, I stand corrected,
but I think in view of
what we said earlier
about public sector pay
and everybody who has
to
align themselves, I think we should
consider that this is a sensible
move to make.
It can be reverted when
circumstances improve and I do
believe that a large percentage
of the population of this country do
believe that we actually contribute
more than our fair share anyway.
Michael].
Yeah, I understand to a certain
extent why we’ve had
to reduce the number,
but I don’t, what I would
like to see is, as this
is supposedly a short—term
reduction, is actually a fixed date
as to when this number
is to rise back again.
And, Claire.
I think I agree with most
of the comments that have been said,
but to use an aeroplane analogy,
I think it is really
important that we put our own
oxygen mask on first.
And I think that we do need
to keep it in perspective.
This is a cut and it’s
not permanent.
And it is going to be reinstated.
But I do agree with Michael, it’s
a case of, when will that happen?
Tanni.
I think it’s one of those questions
that it’s very easy to give
a definitive yes or no
without exploring
everything behind it.
And you know, as a nation,
I do think we have a responsibility
to look to the rest of the world,
as we have a responsibility to look
after the most vulnerable
we have in our society.
But it’s actually quite a political
term when you think about it.
And it’s actually about politics.
It’s about sub—politics.
It’s about hard politics.
It’s about influence.
It is about peacekeeping.
It’s about trying to encourage
different countries to support us
in lots of different ways.
And I’d like to kind of have a more
detailed conversation
about what that aid means
in lots of different ways.
I think we need to think about,
as everyone else has said,
how quickly we can get back
to where we are and where we spend
the money that we save.
Because we’ve all talked about how
difficult economically
we are at the moment.
The other thing is,
as far as I understand it,
it’s got to be changed
by legislation and that has got
to go through both chambers,
the Commons and the Lords.
And that’s the chance
to interrogate every single part
of this and what the aid
means, going forward.
But I do think we have a
responsibility to help other people.
Claire.
Ithink...
I really agree with Tanni,
a bit of the bigger picture
and a bit more complicated.
I think the idea that this cut means
that you don’t care about the global
poor is a misunderstanding.
And I’m not defending the Tories’
cut because I actually have got
a bigger question about aid anyway,
and I always thought
that their legislation
to have the 0.7% had an element
of kind of moral grandstanding that
I found distasteful.
Because I think that the way that
you’re a global leader is not...
and I think it lacks imagination
that we think it’s only through aid.
I mean, we need to have, and be
encouraging countries to develop.
I’ll tell you what’s really hit
developing countries at the moment,
it’s not this decision to cut
the aid budget, but think
about the garment workers
in Bangladesh and the tourism
industry in those
developing countries.
That Western decision, in my
opinion, to have a disproportionate
reaction to coronavirus has
devastated their ability
to have their own industries,
their own autonomy and so
on and so forth.
So they’re suffering
as a consequence of actions we do
and you can’tjust say,
oh, well, aid would have compensated
for that, because it wouldn’t.
Their own governments are also
taking action against coronavirus.
Yes, but in different ways.
But I’m saying if you look actually
at all of the global reports,
they’ll say that the devastating
impact of the West’s
reaction of stopping
people travel and tourism,
as I say, but also the industries.
And if we really want to do
something, I think that we should
have no tariffs on, for example,
chocolate coming from Africa, parts
of Africa, in post—Brexit Britain.
There are all sorts of ways.
In other words, I believe in more
trade, not aid, if you want,
but encouraging development.
Rather than simply treating people
as though they are going to have
crumbs off the table of aid.
We have to remember as well,
it sounds very nice,
but aid is quite contentious.
It’s very political.
Aid NGOs are like a big
business, right?
They’re like multinationals,
a lot of them, they’re huge.
It’s not just straightforwardly
going to the global poor.
So I want to be able to query that,
to at least ask questions,
to have a complicated
and sophisticated conversation —
I’m not being funny about it —
without people thinking
you want to kill off
the global poor, because that
is actually not right.
And I think global Britain,
I do like the fact that there’s been
this attempt at saying that
vaccinations will be shared.
I thought one of the great things
about the Oxford AstraZeneca thing
was that vaccinations would go
to those countries.
So don’t let’s just see it as aid,
because there is a slightly
patronising aspect to that.
If we think the only way
that the global poor can ever stop
being poor is if we give them
hand—outs — usually with political
strings, by the way.
So, I would be having a bigger
conversation about aid and it’s not
about being little Britain and not
helping people out, it’s
about being appropriate
about what you do in terms
of global poverty.
Vaughan.
Well, this is a clear breach
of a manifesto promise.
The amount would, of
course, be going down —
because GDP is shrinking
across the UK, we’d actually be
providing less of a sum.
This is a choice to have an even
bigger cut to that budget.
I don’t often agree
with David Cameron,
but I think he’s right on this.
I think it’s the wrong time to cede
part of our global leadership,
it sends out the wrong signal
about who we want to be in the UK.
And this isn’t simply
about hand—outs.
I mean, I’ve been...
As part of our much smaller Wales
for Africa programme —
I’ve been to Uganda,
and I’ve seen what our development
projects do, working together
with local communities.
Actually helping them to build
and develop and deliver
in a more sustainable way,
and that has a real impact.
And that benefits us
as well, I think.
In a time of more global
uncertainty, what we can do to help
other parts of the world become more
stable in the way we use our budgets
really does matter.
And I don’t think you need to say
we can’t help other vulnerable
or poorer people unless we deal
with our own first.
Because actually, we are already
told that you can’t help some people
within our country without punishing
others as well.
It’s the wrong argument to have and,
actually, we have enough resources
in this country to look
after our own people
and to still maintain the level
of global leadership
and the commitments we have
made and put into law.
So I look forward to seeing
what happens when the bill has to go
through both Houses of Parliament
because, as I say, it’s a direct
breach of a manifesto commitment
and I think it’s the wrong choice
and it does say something
about the values that
drive this UK Government.
I want to try and squeeze in one
more question from Michael Brennan.
Hello, thank you, Fiona.
Coronavirus has led to all four
nations taking their own approach
to controlling the pandemic.
Will this provide the ground that
will support the notion
of a Welsh Independence vote?
Well, go on, Adam,
you have a run—in at this first.
Yeah, I mean, that’s something that
has been a theme, hasn’t it,
throughout the pandemic?
Because we’ve seen
the surging support,
the highest ever level of support
new for independence in Wales.
That’s partly because I think
of the contrast...
Not for Plaid Cymru.
I mean, support for independence
is significantly higher
than support for your party.
Yeah, well, you’re right,
it’s interesting.
50% of Labour support, they won’t be
that pleased about this,
but 50% of Labour supporters in some
opinion polls are
supporting independence.
So there’s definitely
something happening.
And I think it’s partly
the contrast between,
as one of the audience members said,
I think between the rather shambolic
approach to the pandemic
that we’ve seen sadly
from the Westminster Government
to do better, more consistent,
coherent approach from the devolved
administrations, including
the Welsh Government.
I think there’s a sense in Wales
generally as well, as a nation,
that we’ve done some
incredible work together.
The government, yes.
The community.
And we’ve shown as a small nation
that we can do this.
And there are many decisions that...
As an independent country,
we could have introduced
Universal Basic Income,
so those self—employed people that
I’ve referred to wouldn’t have
been left reeling.
And I think people look at some
of the small countries.
We were talking of mass testing
earlier, weren’t we?
Look at Slovakia.
Tested the entire nation.
The first country in
the world to do so.
And look at those many success
stories during the pandemic,
both economically and in health
terms, many of them have been small,
independent countries.
And I think people in Wales
are inspired by that.
You know, we need a bit
of inspiration and hope,
and I think independence is part
of that feeling.
Do you know what?
As a country, we can do this.
Vaughan.
My friend is 30 today and I think
on his 40th birthday
will still be part of the UK.
The prospect of that lessened,
though, given the action
of this Prime Minister.
He is the biggest
recruiting sergeant
for the independence movement.
And that is the way he’s gone
about notjust this pandemic
handling, the way he’s spoken
about parts of the Union,
his actions in office.
And I think the real challenge
here is if you do believe the union
of the UK gives Wales the best
chance, with a devolved national
vote, to make our own choices,
make our own decisions in a range
of areas, but still benefit
from being part of a wider
union of countries then,
actually, the way that this
government has gone about a range
of choices and the way that we have
sometimes been treated
with real contempt...
For example, HS2 spend is counted
as England and Wales,
yet not a single inch of H52 track
or spend is going to come to Wales.
It’s a detriment
to the Welsh economy.
But this government decides
that that’s actually
England and Wales funds.
That costs real money
for people in Wales,
a real detriment to
infrastructure spend.
So there’s a real challenge
here in the tone and the performance
of this government.
If they’re serious about the union,
they need to act like they’re
a government before the whole
of the United Kingdom and show more
respect for people in Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.
And they can do something about that
by taking a very different approach
to the Internal Markets Bill,
which is a direct assault
on devolution and Welsh
farmers are going to find
they are going to pay
the price for the choices
this
Government has made.
Because the betrayal in the current
statement from the Chancellor
yesterday does show a significant
cut in money going to rural
communities, and a straightforward
power grab for devolved
responsibilities.
It’s absolutely not the way
to safeguard the union
of the United Kingdom.
Tanni.
I was born and spent sort
of the vast majority
of my life living in Wales.
The only reason I left
was because of my husband’s job.
And it’s been interesting living
in England and then seeing
the reaction in Wales and Scotland
and Northern Ireland to devolution
and the increase of desire for it.
Ithink, you know, I’d be really
upset for the UK to split up,
but I think that’s partly being 3 GB
athlete and those things as well.
But I think what people
want to feel is connected
to their decision—makers.
And one thing I’m really conscious
of where I live now...
And, you know, Iwork
in the Westminster bubble
in London, which is a bubble.
You know, we are a long
way from London.
Economically, socially.
Pre—lockdown, it was cheaper to fly
to Europe than it was to
get a train to London.
And so, I think people
want to feel connected,
they want to feel in control,
they want to feel engaged,
that their vote makes a difference.
And I think this is a problem
for all of British politics,
in terms of how people
are disengaged.
I go to a lot of schools and young
people say, I hate politics.
And I go, no, you might not like
watching Prime Minister’s Questions.
For a moment there, Tanni,
I thought you might say
Question Time, but you held
back, well done!
I almost had a panic there!
So did I!
You know, if we don’t engage people
and we don’t have people thinking
that their vote has a say...
And we know that young people,
if they don’t vote in the first
general election after they’re 18,
their chance of voting will drop
again and again and again,
and then they become
even less engaged.
So I think what people want is,
they want to feel that
their politicians are listening
to them, that they understand them,
that they are not disconnected.
And that is why I think we’re seeing
a greater call for independence.
So, Nadhim, Vaughan Gething saying
that BorisJohnson has proven to be
the best recruiting sergeant
for independence in Wales.
We had the SNP on last week saying
the same thing for Scotland.
Well, I don’t agree.
I think devolution worked for Boris
when he was London Mayor by focusing
on what Londoners wanted,
which is better security,
better housing, cleaner air.
And I think devolution needs to be
seen, I think to Tanni’s point,
people need to see it working.
We’re much stronger together.
Vaughan talks about
the internal market.
The internal market
is the most successful market
probably in the world.
Wales sells to the rest
of the United Kingdom...
But he’s talking about
the Internal Markets Bill.
That’s my point, exactly.
Wales sells to the rest of the UK
about 30 billion and buys back
about 32 billion from the rest
of the UK.
Those companies in Wales need to be
able to sell that freely
without restrictions.
And buy without restriction.
That’s why the Internal Markets Bill
is so important, Fiona.
And actually, Wales is £5 billion,
you know, additional spending
through the pandemic
because of the United Kingdom
being together and stronger.
The devolved administrations,
£16 billion of additional spending.
That’s a good thing.
I talked to my colleagues
from Wales, Ken Skates
and Fiona Hyslop and Diane Dodds
in Northern Ireland,
almost on a weekly basis
during the crisis.
We have an excellent
working relationship.
I think, actually, what people
in Swansea, in Glasgow and in London
needs to see is their politicians
working much closer together
in this difficult time
because we’re much stronger united.
Claire, we are very nearly out
of time, but I just want to give
you a chance with this question.
The fact that coronavirus has
led to the four nations
taking their own approach in terms
of controlling coronavirus.
I think it’s been divisive.
I don’t actually think it’s been
helpfulfor the union.
I think it’s also created
a sense of confusion
about the United Kingdom myself.
I think it’s wrong to suggest that
if you’ve got politicians physically
closer, that they’re going to be
more in touch with you.
Let me assure you, as somebody
from North Wales, having
the Senedd in Cardiff,
there is a clique of
people around the Senedd.
That doesn’t mean that
people in North Wales feel
like they’re closer.
It’s a political question,
not a physical one.
And I think that there’s been
a huge amount of problems
with the Welsh administration.
School education standards
have been abysmal under
the present administration.
I was yesterday in the House
of Lords looking at the mental
health legislation where,
thank goodness, the Coronavirus Act
which gave the power to section
people with just one doctor
and for a long time,
which should never have been
there in the first place,
has been repealed.
Wales have kept it on.
I mean, don’t ask me why
because it’s absolutely draconian.
We had Mark Drakeford telling
us what was essential
and nonessential shopping.
No, I don’t necessarily
think that the handling
of the coronavirus. ..
And by the way, all sorts
of problems of testing
at the beginning, and they did...
I’m going to have to hurry you,
I’m sorry, Claire, we’re
running out of time.
..care homes in Wales.
So, yeah, I think it’s much more
complicated than saying, oh,
there you go, itjust shows Wales
can go on its own, then.
No, it doesn’t.
It needs to be interrogated
and they need to be held to account
for the mistakes they’ve made.
That’s why we have elections.
Exactly.
I’m going to end it here, simply
because we are running out of time.
I’m so sorry because I can see this
could go backwards and forwards
for quite some time.
But our time is up, our hour is up.
Tonight, our questions
came from Swansea.
Next week, we’ll be joined
by an audience in Bath and,
the week after that,
Chelmsford.
So, do get in touch,
comejoin the debate.
You can apply on the
Question Time website,
and you fill in the form there,
and let’s see if you can come and be
part of our audience.
We would love to see you.
Adrian Chiles is coming up
on Radio 5 Live with
Question Time Extra Time,
as always, with his guests.
You can see on the screen how to get
in touch and put your views there.
But for now, thank you very much
to the panel here in the studio
and to Vaughan and Tanni
forjoining me down the line.
From our audience in Swansea,
thank you very much for being
part of the programme.
And of course, to you at home,
thank you very much for watching.
From Question Time, bye—bye.
APPLAUSE
"To Anton,
you’re a great player, mate.
"Best wishes
and good luck, john Terry.‘
A few years later,
we were in a massive racism case.
It’s still described as one of
the dirtiest West London derbies.
He wasn’t found guilty
in a court of law.
You thought, "Crikey,
this is a big story."
It’s like it’s become normal again
and I need to come to terms with
the impact it did have on me.
1.
II
Well, today we are going to be
joined by the former
International Development Secretary,
Justine Greening.
Hello.
Hi, Adam, how are you?
I’m very well and it’s
going to get better,
because we are going to start off
with a little quiz,
because I love a quiz
and you are going to get this,
as a former International
Development Secretary,
because everyone knows the UK’s
current target for spending
on international aid is 0.7%
of gross national income,